“She turned me into a NEWT! I got better… Then I moved on to the NEXT
big thing.”

TempEst-NEWT
============

TempEst-NEWT (stream temperature estimation: near-term expected
watershed temperatures) is a statistical model to hindcast and forecast
daily stream temperature for watersheds using air temperature and vapor
pressure only. It’s essentially a complicated air-temperature
regression, but a high-performing one, with a median validation-period
RMSE of 1.4 C, R2 of 0.95, and bias of 0.003%.

NEWT is principally developed as the calibrated component of
`TempEst-NEXT <https://github.com/mines-ciroh/TempEst-NEXT>`__, which
couples NEWT with coefficient estimation for ungaged-watershed
forecasting, but it is also useful as a standalone, calibrated model and
is therefore made available as its own package. NEWT and NEXT are part
of the TempEst family of models, including `TempEst
1 <https://github.com/river-tempest/tempest>`__ for remote sensing-based
monthly mean temperatures and `TempEst
2 <https://github.com/mines-ciroh/TempEst2>`__ for remote sensing-based
daily mean and maximum temperatures, both in ungaged watersheds. TempEst
2 and NEXT have similar functionality, but TempEst-NEXT is capable of
forecasting and disturbance modeling, while TempEst 2 is only for
historical estimation (but is much faster and uses less data). TempEst
1/2 are intended for fast analyses of large-domain historical patterns,
while NEWT/NEXT are more focused on in-depth analysis of changes over
time, as well as forecasting.

TempEst-NEWT is implemented using
`libSCHEMA <https://mines-ciroh.github.io/libSCHEMA/>`__.

Quick Start
-----------

Installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Install from PyPI: ``pip install tempest-newt``. The installed module is
called NEWT: ``import NEWT``. The main model class is
``NEWT.Watershed``.

Data Preparation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To generate predictions with a NEWT model with specified coefficients
(``Watershed.run_series(data)``), the requirement is a data frame with
columns ``date`` (a Pandas datetime), ``day`` (Julian day), and ``tmax``
(daily max air temperature, averaged over the watershed). To train a
model from data (``Watershed.from_data(data)``), there also needs to be
a ``temperature`` (observed daily stream water temperature) column.
Performance results are for daily mean, but this also works with daily
max or min.

Model Execution
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The standard approach to running the model is
``Watershed.run_series(data)``, which executes the model for the full
provided timeseries and adds a ``prediction`` column. If modification
engines are not in use, this runs a fast single-pass approach.
Otherwise, it runs step-by-step, applying modification engines when
needed. You can also manually run step-by-step using
``.run_step(inputs)`` - a single step - or
``.run_series_incremental(data)``, which forces the full series to be
run step-by-step.

An optional argument to ``run_series`` is ``context``. If True
(default), it adds a ``prediction`` column, as described. Otherwise, it
just returns the array of predictions.

Detailed Documentation
----------------------

See the `documentation <https://rivertempest.org/newt/newt.html>`__ at
RiverTempest.org.

Capabilities Overview
---------------------

The default NEWT configuration runs a stationary seasonality plus
weather model, a direct implementation of the SCHEMA (Seasonal
Conditions Historical Expectation with Modeled daily Anomaly) approach
developed for TempEst 2. However, you can also specify “modification
engines”, which activate at specified intervals to modify coefficients
based on model history. This allows accounting for disturbances,
droughts, climate change, etc. These are simply passed as an argument to
initializing the watershed model; see the reference linked above.

Citation
--------

If you use TempEst-NEWT in your research, please cite:

Philippus, Corona and Hogue. “Kilometer-Resolution Daily Stream Water
Temperature Modeling and Forecasting for Ungaged Watersheds at the CONUS
Scale.” In preparation.
